---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to Design for (Cost Effective) Assembly and Manufacturing"
source: http://me.gatech.edu/files/capstone/L071ME4182DFA
category: slides
author:  David Stienstra (Rose-Hulman) from Gatech
---

DFA and DFM definition

>  DFA is the method of design of the product for **ease of assembly**. DFM is the method of design for **ease of manufacturing of the collection of parts** that will form the product after assembly.

Concerns

> DFA is concerned only with reducing product assembly cost. DFM is concerned with reducing overall part production cost.

Similarities between DFA and DFM

- reduce material, overhead, and labor cost
- shorten the product development cycle time
- utilize standards to reduce cost

Analysis steps:

1. Concept design
1. Design for assembly -> Optimize design for part count and assembly
1. Design for manufacturing -> Optimize design for production readiness
1. Detailed design

Design for Assembly Principles

- Minimize part count
- Design parts with self-locating features
- Design parts with self-fastening features
- Minimize reorientation of parts during assembly
- Design parts for retrieval, handling, & insertion
- Emphasize ‘Top-Down’ assemblies
- Standardize parts (minimum use of fasteners)
- Encourage modular design
- Design for a base part to locate other components
- Design for component symmetry for insertion

Count Parts & Interfaces

- List number of parts (`Np`)
- List number of interfaces (`Ni`)

Part standardization:

- Within the assembly station
- Within the full assembly
- Within the assembly plant
- Within the corporation
- Within the industry

DFA Complexity Factor

`Square root of summation of number of parts and number of part-to-part interfaces`

Fasteners

> A study by Ford Motor Co. revealed that **threaded fasteners were the most common cause of warranty repairs**. This finding is echoed in more recent survey of automotive mechanics, in which **80% reported finding loose or incorrect fasteners** in cars they serviced.

Fastener cost from least to most expensive:

1. snap fit
1. plastic bending
1. riveting
1. screwing

Handling Time: based on assembly process and complexity of parts

- How many hands are required?
- Is any grasping assistance needed?
- What is the effect of part symmetry on assembly?
- Is the part easy to align/position?

Handling Difficulty

- Size
- Thickness
- Sharpness
- Weight
- Fragility
- Flexibility
- Slipperiness
- Stickiness
- Necessity for using 1) two hands, 2) optical magnification, or 3) mechanical assistance

Assembly metrics:

- Error proofing
- Handling Index
- Insertion Index
- 2nd Op. Index

Analyze all metrics:

1. Reduce part count & type - **Part count efficiency and DFA Complexity Factor**
1. Error Proofing - **Error Index**
1. Ease of handling - **Handling Index**
1. Ease of insertion - **Insertion Index**
1. Eliminate secondary ops - **2nd Op. Index**

DFMA Principles

- Minimize Part Count
- Standardize Parts and Materials
- Create Modular Assemblies
- Design for Efficient Joining
- Minimize Reorientation of parts during Assembly and/or Machining
- Simplify and Reduce the number of Manufacturing Operations
- Specify ‘Acceptable’ surface Finishes for functionality
