---
layout: post
title:  "Apple M1 foreshadows Rise of RISC-V"
source: https://erik-engheim.medium.com/apple-m1-foreshadows-risc-v-dd63a62b2562
author: Erik Engheim
category: [7]
---

## Changes

Moore's Law

> They saw how the end of Moore’s Law meant that **you could no longer easily squeeze more performance out of general purpose CPU cores**. You needed specialized hardware: Coprocessors.

Speed

> We are **stuck on close to 3–5 GHz**. Go higher and Watt consumption and heat generation goes through the roof. However we are able to add a lot more transistors. We simply cannot make the transistors work faster.

## RISC-V Advantages

Low number of instructions

> This is exactly what RISC-V got designed for. It has a bare minimum instruction-set of about **40–50 instructions** which lets it do all the typical CPU stuff. It may sound like a lot, but keep in mind that an x86 CPU has over **1500 instructions**.

Using less silicon

> The small and simple instruction-set of RISC-V makes it possible to implement RISC-V cores in much less silicon than ARM.

## Future: Arm + RISC-V

Processor + Coprocessors

> Every coprocessor will be different. It will thus contain a RISC-V processor to manage things which implements the **core instruction-set** as well as an **extension instruction-set** tailor made for what that co-processor needs to do.

ARM Processor + RISC-V Coprocessors

> Ironically we may see a future where Macs and PCs are **powered by ARM processors**. But where all the custom hardware around them, all their **coprocessors will be dominated by RISC-V**. As coprocessor get more popular more silicon in your System-on-a-Chip (SoC) may be running RISC-V than ARM.

ARM + RISC-V, not ARM or RISC-V

> I though the future would be about ARM or RISC-V. Instead it will likely be ARM and RISC-V.

Combining general purpose + specialized tasks

> General purpose ARM processors will be at the center with an army of RISC-V powered coprocessors accelerating every possible task from graphics, encryption, video encoding, machine learning, signal processing to processing network packages.
