---
layout: post
title:  "I, Pencil"
author: Leonard E. Read
source: https://fee.org/resources/i-pencil/
category: [5]
---

Not a single person by themself can make a pencil

> Does anyone wish to challenge my earlier assertion that no single person on the face of this earth knows how to make me?

Central or divided planning?

> “This is not a dispute about whether planning is to be done or not. It is a dispute as to whether planning is to be done centrally, by one authority for the whole economic system, or is to be divided among many individuals.

### Manufacturing a pencil

Pencil's components

> Not much meets the eye—there’s some wood, lacquer, the printed labeling, graphite lead, a bit of metal, and an eraser.

Machinery used to get the raw material of wood

> Now contemplate all the saws and trucks and rope and the countless other gear used in harvesting and carting the cedar logs to the railroad siding.

Glueing the 8 grooves of the pencil

> each slat is given eight grooves by a complex machine, after which another machine lays leads in every other slat, applies glue, and places another slat atop—a lead sandwich, so to speak.

Miners of graphite, the other raw material

> Consider these miners and those who make their many tools and the makers of the paper sacks in which the graphite is shipped and those who make the string that ties the sacks and those who put them aboard ships and those who make the ships

Combination of many people, technologies and materials

> I, Pencil, am a complex combination of miracles: a tree, zinc, copper, graphite, and so on.

### The economics of making the pencil

Every small part in making the pencil are an exchange

> Their motivation is other than me. Perhaps it is something like this: Each of these millions sees that he can thus exchange his tiny know-how for the goods and services he needs or wants. I may or may not be among these items.

No single authority

> There is a fact still more astounding: The **absence of a master mind**, of anyone dictating or forcibly directing these countless actions which bring me into being

Let all types of creativity grow

> The lesson I have to teach is this: Leave all creative energies uninhibited. Merely organize society to act in harmony with this lesson. Let society’s legal apparatus remove all obstacles the best it can. Permit these creative know-hows freely to flow.
