---
layout: post
title:  "The View from Ninety"
author: Edward Packard
source: https://www.edwardpackard.com/view/
category: [6]
---

You don't think about the pros and cons of each possible choice

> The idea was that they would have to think about the pros and cons of each possible choice and analyze which would be best. It wasn’t until many decades later that I realized that the way life plays out doesn’t just turn on conscious decisions made at key junctures. Rather, the paths you take are determined largely by chance and by what kind of person you are.

How does life unfold

> events seem to be happening in rapid sequence before you can assimilate them, so that you have little or no sense of making decisions, and in fact you are not — you are traveling through time as if floating downstream on a river raft, poling now and then and sometimes hanging up on a shoal, **not paying proper attention**, maybe falling asleep, and finding yourself almost on the opposite bank, where the wind took you, which is **not where you meant to be**, all the while missing something, and you may not even know what it is.

Who are the sleepwalkers?

> Sleepwalkers are people who proceed through the day as if on autopilot. Thoughts pass through their minds, but they fail to consider their import, implications, and likely consequences.

Avoding realities

> Sleepwalking and self-deception are intertwined. They are ways of shielding oneself from inconvenient, challenging, and painful realities.

How to find meaning and purpose in life

> there are three ways to find meaning, or purpose, in life: (i) constructive work; (ii) love and caring for others; and (iii) courage and resolve in the face of suffering

Relgious != Spiritual

> You don’t need to be religious to be spiritual...  I think that a non-religious person can be spiritual, if only in being in awe of the great mystery of the origin and character of the universe and of our existence in it,

Why is spiritual awareness important?

> Spiritual awareness is integral to transforming your consciousness and attaining the right state of mind.

Impulsive or self-constituted?

> Harvard philosopher Christine Korsgaard defines a self-constituted person as one with integrity, who is **responsive to a built-in moral compass** rather than a “heap of impulses.” If you are self-constituted, you are resistant to opportunities for rationalization, self-deception, and impulses that assert themselves in your particular heap of them.
