---
layout: post
title:  "A World War II Plane That Kept Crashing Helped Lead to Steve Jobs's Biggest Innovations"
author: Minda Zetlin
source: https://calnewport.com/larry-junes-slow-productivity/
category: [6]
keywords: ["shape coding", "ergonomics", "human-centered design"]
---

Focus on the human, not the machine

> The shift in thinking required to fix that error - from focusing on the machine to focusing on the human using it - was the first step down the path that led to the iPhone and the iPad today.

Pilot error?

> By the end of the war, there had been thousands of such crashes. They were generally attributed to pilot error - after all, wartime had necessitated quickly training a lot of new pilots.

Psychologists to the rescue

> The accidents remained a mystery until after the war, when psychologists Paul Fitts and Alphonse Chapanis finally figured it out - and the answer was stupidly simple.

Identical controls, opposite functions

> The control that lowered the landing gear and the one that lowered the wing flaps looked identical. It was all too easy for a pilot, especially at night, to reach for the landing gear control and grab the wing flap one instead.

Shape coding

> Chapanis pioneered the **field of shape coding** by creating a system of levers and knobs for airplanes in which **each control had a different shape**, making it much harder to mistake any of them for something else. He's considered one of the creators of the field of **ergonomics**.

Design for human behavior

> B-17 redesign was the first time it occurred to anyone that **we should design machines to accommodate human behavior** instead of retraining human behavior to fit machines.
